## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Cell signaling is regulated in part through a network of protein kinases and phosphatases. Dysregulation of kinase signaling is widespread in diseases such as cancer and is readily targetable through inhibitors of kinase enzymatic activity. Mass spectrometry-based analysis of kinase signaling can provide a global view of kinase signaling regulation but making sense of these data is complicated by its stochastic coverage of the proteome, measurement of substrates rather than kinase signaling itself, and the scale of the data collected. Here, we propose a combined data and motif clustering strategy (DDMC) that simultaneously clusters substrate peptides into similarly regulated groups based on their variation within an experiment and their sequence profile. We show that this can help to identify putative upstream kinases and supply more robust clustering. We apply this clustering to large-scale clinical proteomic profiling of lung cancer and identify conserved proteomic signatures of tumorigenicity and genetic mutations. We propose that DDMC provides a general and flexible clustering strategy for phosphoproteomic data.

## Summary points

- A dual data-motif clustering (DDMC) strategy improves phosphoproteomic clustering.
- Phosphoproteomic clusters identify signaling dysregulation common to tumors and specific genetic backgrounds.
- Identified clusters are not limited to pre-existing motifs and are therefore not dependent on prior kinase-substrate characterization
- DDMC provides a general and flexible strategy for phosphoproteomic analysis.
