## Introduction

<!-- Kinase signaling / phophoproteomics in general -->

Cell signaling networks formed by protein kinases regulate cell fate and behavior through protein phosphorylation [@PMID:7834742]. As such, it is not surprising that kinase dysregulation orchestrates the onset and development of a myriad of diseases, including cancer. Measuring cell signaling by mass spectrometry (MS)-based global phosphoproteomics provides a promising opportunity to direct therapy development [@PMID:30670634], particularly given the accessibility of these signaling changes to drug targeting. Nevertheless, despite the rapid accumulation of large-scale phosphoproteomic clinical data, it is still difficult to identify the signaling events leading to observed proteomic alterations and phenotypic outcomes.

<!-- Current methods to analyze phosphoproteomics -->

One approach to make sense of phosphoproteomic measurements has been to infer the activity of upstream kinases. Previously published methods combine each phosphopeptide with reported kinase-substrate interactions to reconstruct signaling networks. For instance, kinase-substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) averages the signals of groups of kinase substrates to infer enriched pathways in biological samples [@PMID:23532336]. Another method, Integrative Inferred Kinase Activity (INKA), infers kinase activity by integrating the scores of two components that compute kinase's overall and activation loop phosphorylation and the scores of two components that quantify the phosphorylation abundance of all substrates of the same kinase. Kinase-substrate relationships are either experimentally observed on PhosphoSitePlus or predicted by NetworKIN, an algorithm that uses sequence motif and protein-protein network information [@PMID:31126969; @PMID:30445427; @PMID:17570479]. Finally, Scansite predicts kinase-substrate interactions while identifying the sequence motifs that are recognized by specific modular signaling protein domains using kinase specificity profiles generated from oriented peptide library scanning experiments[@PMID:12824383]. These methods, sometimes in combination, help to reconstruct signaling pathway activities from phosphoproteomic measurements.

<!-- Limitations of these methods; (1) Kinase prediction bias (2) Data missingness -->

Kinase-substrate inference still provides a limited view of signaling network changes, however. Kinase prediction methods are necessarily dependent on characterized kinase-substrate interactions. Unfortunately, the majority of the phosphoproteome remains largely uncharacterized [@PMID:30670635]. Just 20% of kinases have been shown to phosphorylate 87% of currently annotated substrates and around 80% of kinases have fewer than 20 substrates, with 30% yet to be assigned a single substrate [@PMID:30670635]. Hence, insights generated by computational methods dependent on this unequal distribution of known interactions are less likely to identify understudied protein kinases. An additional major challenge being faced during the analysis of large-scale signaling data is missingness. This is due to two major limitations of discovery-mode multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) MS. This technique processes batches of a limited number of samples at a time per experiment while the signaling coverage in each experiment is stochastic. This means that the portion of the phosphoproteome quantified in the samples of different TMT experiments varies [@PMID:19921851]. Thus, in the resulting data set some phosphosites are observed in particular groups of samples whereas in others are not. Computational tools usually require complete data sets and so a frequent strategy to handle this challenge is either imputing missing values with a representative statistic (e.g. average signal) or throwing out any peptides displaying missing values–at the expense of losing critical information [@PMID:32649875; @PMID:32649874]. Kinase enrichment and prediction methods are further compromised by this problem. Thus, there is a clear need to develop tailored unbiased computational methods capable of modeling the entirety of the phosphoproteomic data set despite missingness. 

<!-- Introucing motifs -->

Widely used clustering methods such as hierarchical or k-means clustering identify signaling nodes by grouping phosphopeptides based on their co-variation. This clustering criterion results in groups of peptides that display similar activation patterns across conditions, but that may be regulated by sets of different upstream kinases. Studies have shown that the residues surrounding phosphorylation sites have had to evolve throughout millions of years to become exquisitely fine-tuned motifs that confer signaling specificity and fidelity [@PMID:14668868; @PMID:19589966]. Clustering based on motif similarity might, therefore, improve model interpretation by facilitating the identification of upstream kinases modulating particular clusters that display conserved sequence motifs. On the other hand, clustering peptides based on sequence distance may result in groups of proteins that, while sharing the same set of upstream kinases, are differently regulated due to context. Thus, combining phosphorylation status and sequence similarity may enable a balanced characterization of the cell signaling state.

<!-- Introduction to paper -->

Here, we present an algorithm, Dual Data and Motif Clustering (DDMC), that probabilistically and simultaneously models both the peptide phosphorylation variation and peptide sequence motifs of peptide clusters to reconstitute cell signaling networks and identify causal interactions (Fig. {@fig:method}). To test the utility of our method, we analyze the phosphoproteomes of 110 treatment-naïve lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) tumors and 101 paired normal adjacent tissues (NATs) from the National Cancer Institute (NCI)’s Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) LUAD study [@PMID:32649874]. We characterize the phosphoproteome of patients by identifying those signaling signatures associated with tumorigenesis, the presence of specific mutations, and tumor immune infiltration. In total, we demonstrate DDMC as a general strategy for improving the analysis of phosphoproteomic surveys.