## Results

### Constructing an expectation-maximization algorithm tailored for clustering phosphoproteomic data

![**Schematic of the DDMC approach to cluster global signaling data and infer upstream kinases driving phenotypes** A) DDMC is run to cluster an input phosphoproteomic data set to generate 4 clusters of peptides that show similar sequence motifs and phosphorylation behavior. B) Predictive modeling using clusters allows one to establish associations between specific clusters and features of interest. C) Putative upstream kinases regulating meaningful clusters can be predicted by computing the distance between a cluster motif and PSPL PSSM. PSSM; Position-specific scoring matrix, PSPL; Position scanning peptide library.](DDMC_functional_diagram.svg "Figure 1"){#fig:method width="100%"}

MS-based global phosphoproteomic data provides unparalleled coverage when interrogating kinase signaling networks and their therapeutic implications. However, these data also present challenging issues as a consequence of their incomplete and stochastic coverage, high-content but low-sample throughput, and variation in coverage across experiments. In addressing these issues, we recognized that MS measurements provide two pieces of information: the exact site of phosphorylation on a peptide sequence and some measure of abundance within the measured samples. Both of these pieces of information are critical to the overall interpretation of the data.

Based on this observation, we built a mixture model that probabilistically clusters phosphosites based on both their peptide sequence and abundance across samples (Figure {@fig:methodS}). In each iteration, DDMC applies an expectation-maximization algorithm to optimize clusters that capture the average features of member sequences and their abundance variation (Figure {@fig:method}A and {@fig:methodS}). Both information sources—peptide abundance and sequence—can be prioritized by a weight parameter. With a weight of 0, DDMC becomes a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) that clusters peptides according to their phosphorylation signal. With a very large weight, DDMC exclusively clusters peptides according to their peptide sequences. Clustering both the sequence and abundance measurements ensures that the resulting clusters are a function of both features, which we hypothesized would provide both more meaningful and robust clusters.

The resulting clustering provides coordinated outputs that can be used in a few different ways. The cluster centers, by virtue of being a summary for the abundance changes of these peptides, can be regressed against phenotypic responses (e.g., cell phenotypes or clinical outcomes) to establish associations between particular clusters and response (Figure {@fig:method}B). Regression using the clusters instead of each peptide ensures that the model can be developed despite relatively few samples, with minimal loss of information since each peptide within a cluster varies in a similar manner.

In parallel or independently, one can generate Position-Specific Scoring Matrices (PSSMs) from the resulting cluster sequence motifs. PSSMs represent the frequencies of every natural amino acid across peptide positions and thus provides a general representation of all cluster motifs by illustrating residues are favored or disfavored in every position (Figure {@fig:method}A). Cluster PSSMs can be readily compared to other information such as experimentally generated specificity profiles of putative upstream kinases via Position Specific Scanning Libraries (PSPL) [@PMID:10945990; @PMID:20159853; @PMID:31124786; @PMID:15782149; @PMID:26551075]. We extracted a collection of 65 kinase specificity profiles from prior studies to identify which cluster motifs most resemble the optimal motif of putative upstream kinases (Figure {@fig:method}C) [@PMID:18765831; @PMID:15782149; @PMID:26551075]. However, as kinase-substrate specificity is also dictated by features outside of the immediate substrate region, we also note that our approach is more general than strictly assembling kinase-substrate predictions as non-enzymatic specificity information may be present in the DDMC sequence motifs. Overall, this overview demonstrates how DDMC can take complex, coordinated signaling measurements and find patterns in the phosphorylation signals to reconstruct signaling networks and associate particular clusters and phenotypes.

### Dual data-motif clustering strategy robustly imputes missing values

![**Benchmarking the robustness of motif clustering to missing measurements** A) A schematic of the process for quantifying robustness to missing values. Any peptides containing less than 7 TMT experiments were discarded. For the remaining 15904 peptides, an entire random TMT experiment was removed per peptide and these values were stored for later comparison. Next, these artificial missing values were imputed using either a baseline strategy (peptide mean/minimum signal, constant zero, or matrix completion by PCA) or the corresponding cluster center. Once a mean squared error was computed for each peptide, the second iteration repeats this process by removing a second TMT experiment. A total of 5 random TMT experiments per peptide were imputed by clustering using a different number of clusters (B–E) or different weights (F–I).](figureM2.svg "Figure 2"){#fig:missingness width="100%"}

A major limitation of multiplexed MS-based large-scale phosphoproteomic data is the presence of missing values due to (i) the limited number of samples proccesed at a time per TMT experiment and (ii) the stochastic signaling coverage in each experiment. Consequently, upon concatenation of the different TMT experiments, phosphosites are observed in groups of samples and missed in others. To evaluate the robustness of DDMC in analyzing incomplete data sets, we designed a computational experiment wherein we removed specific observations and predicted them using the cluster centers corresponding to the peptides those missing values belonged to (Figure {@fig:missingness}A). The resulting mean squared errors between the actual and predicted values were compared to commonly used imputation strategies such as the peptides' mean or minimum signal, constant zero, or matrix completion by PCA. Furthermore, we used this experiment to identify what selection of hyerparameter sets (i.e. number of clusters and weight) enhances missingness imputation performance. We first evaluated the imputation performance of our method when clustering the data using a different number of clusters. We observed that increasing the number of clusters improved the imputation of missing values (Figure {@fig:missingness}B-F). Additionally, we performed the same experiment by clustering the data with different weights. Interestingly, weight selection barely affected imputation performance, indicating that the centers of clusters generated based on only the sequence information imputed missing values as accurately as when incorporating the phosphorylation signal (Figure {@fig:missingness}F-I). These results indicate that DDMC clearly outperforms standard imputation strategies such as using constant zero or the peptides' mean or minimum signal, and imputes missing values as accurately as matrix completion by PCA.


### DDMC correctly predicts AKT1 and ERK2 as upstream kinases of signaling clusters containing their substrates

![**Validation of upstream kinase predictions** (A-B) PCA analysis of the DDMC phosphoproteome clusters of MCF7 cells subjected to a drug screen [@PMID:31959955]. C) Heatmap showing the effect of inhibitors on the phosphorylation signal of cluster 1. D) DDMC upstream kinase prediction of cluster 1. E) NetPhorest upstream kinase prediction of cluster 1. (F) Resulting PSSM generated using ERK2 substrates reported by Carlson et al [@PMID:22028470]. (G) Upstream kinase predictions of CPTAC clusters 7, 9, 13, and 21 in addition to the ERK2 motif shown in (F). H) Upstream kinase predictions of the same PSSMs after randomly shuffling the motif positions.](figureM3.svg "Figure 3"){#fig:val width="100%"}

<!-- AKT cluster via MCF7 drug screening -->
DDMC is a tailored method that clusters MS-generated phosphosites using its phosphorylation behavior and sequence information. A major benefit of modeling the sequence information is the construction of cluster motifs which can be useful to infer what putative upstream kinases might preferentially target peptides of a specific cluster. To validate its ability to make upstream kinase predictions, we used DDMC to cluster the phosphoproteomic measurements of MCF7 cells treated with a panel of 61 drug inhibitors reported by Hijazi et al [@PMID:31959955]. PCA analysis was performed to associate targeted inhibitors and the resulting phosphoproteomic clusters which we anticipated would illustrate the signaling changes induced by the treatments. We clearly identified an inverse correlation between the scores of AKT/mTOR targeted inhibitors (shown in orange in Figure (Figures {@fig:val}A)) and the loading of cluster 1, indicating that the cluster’s overall signal is attenuated by the presence of these compounds (Figures {@fig:val}A-B). Additional inhibitors targeting PDK1 (GSK2334470), FLT3 (AC220), and S6K1 (PFA4708671, LY2584702) were also negatively correlated with cluster 1. While these do not directly inhibit AKT1/mTOR, they are all known regulators of that pathway. A heatmap displaying cluster’s 1 phosphorylation signal across treatments corroborates that the abundance of these peptides is substantially decreased when treated with AKT/mTOR/PIK3 inhibitors (Figure {@fig:val}C). Encouragingly, the specificity profile of AKT—within a collection of 55 different kinase PSPL matrices—most closely matches the PSSM of cluster 1 (Figure {@fig:val}D). Additionally, NetPhorest identified AKT as the second top scoring upstream kinase of cluster 1, further corroborating DDMC’s prediction.

<!-- ERK2 substrates -->
Next, we extracted the sequences of ERK2 substrates identified in Carlson et al to create an “artificial” ERK2-specific PSSM positive control (ERK2+ motif) (Figure {@fig:val}F). As expected, ERK2 was predicted to be the upstream kinase with the highest preference for the cluster’s motif (Figure {@fig:val}G). As an additional test, given the consistent enrichment of hydrophobic and polar residues throughout the entire ERK2 target motif (Figure {@fig:val}F), we asked whether randomly shuffling all cluster PSSM positions surrounding the phosphoacceptor residue would affect the upstream kinase prediction. This experiment led to a 2-fold increase in the distance between ERK2 specificity profile and the ERK2+ motif (Figures {@fig:val}G and H). We subjected those clusters from the CPTAC data set that were preferentially favored by ERK2 to the same experiment. As expected, we observed a similar decline in specificity between the clusters PSSMs and ERK2 PSPL matrix (Figures {@fig:val}H). Note that the noticeable difference in prediction between the ERK2+ motif and the CTPAC ERK2 motifs is not surprising given that while the former group contains only 26 peptides, the CPTAC clusters contain ~500–2000 phosphosites. Overall, this experiment generally shows that despite the homogenous biophysical properties of ERK2 target motif across positions, the relative enrichment of hydrophobic and polar residues in each position determines the extent to which ERK2 favors a particular motif (Figures {@fig:val}G and H). Altogether, these results illustrate two different validation scenarios in which DDMC successfully identifies the upstream kinases regulating clusters.

### A dual data-motif strategy improves prediction of different phenotypes and provides more robust clustering

![**Sequence information enhances model prediction and provides more robust clustering** A) Performance of a regression model predicting the mutational status of STK11 (blue) EGFR and/or ALK (yellow) and tumor infiltration (green) in LUAD patients using either only phosphorylation abundance (weight=0), mainly sequence information (50), or both (0 < w < 50). B) MSE between the phosphorylation signal of 2000 randomly selected peptides and the center of its assigned clusters using a weight of 0 (data), 20 (mix), or 50 (sequence). C) Cumulative PSSM enrichment across positions comparing the peptide abundance, mix, and sequence clustering strategies. (D-H) TBC1D5 peptide p-signal MSE (D), cumulative PSSM enrichment (E), sequence-to-cluster mean PAM250 distance (F), and PSSM logo plots (G).](figureM4.svg "Figure 4"){#fig:preds width="100%"}

<!-- Intro to model set up and data -->
As shown later in this study (Figures {@fig:TvsNAT}, {@fig:STK11}, {@fig:TI}), we utilized DDMC to analyze the phosphoproteomes of 110 treatment-naïve LUAD tumors and 101 paired normal adjacent tissues (NATs) from the NCI’s CPTAC LUAD study. We used DDMC with the binomial sequence distance method and 24 clusters (Figure {@fig:method}, {@fig:missingness}B). We were able to include 30,561 peptides that were not observed in every tumor through our ability to handle missing data, but still filtered out 11,822 peptides that were only captured in one 10-plex TMT run. We used this fitting result throughout the rest of this study. The resulting 24 cluster motifs can be found in Figure {@fig:motifsS}.

<!-- Predictions -->
To evaluate the benefit of incorporating the peptide sequence information into the clustering criterion, we asked whether utilizing DDMC with different sequence weights would affect the performance of a regularized logistic regression model that predicts the mutational status of STK11, whether a patient harbors a mutation in EGFR and/or a gene fusion in ALK (EGFRm/ALKf), and the level of tumor infiltration (“Hot” versus “Cold”). We found that for all three phenotypes, when the method only uses the phosphorylation signal (weight=0), the patient samples are classified with lesser accuracy compared with when a combination of both data and sequence is used. In the case of STK11, the use of the largest weight wherein mainly the sequence motifs are used for clustering provided the best prediction performance. Likewise, EGFRm/ALKf samples were best classified with a mix weight of 15 or 50. Finally, the regression model classifying whether a sample is “hot-tumor-enriched” (HTE) or “cold-tumor-enriched” (CTE) showed the best fitness with a weights of 10, 35, and 40. Together, these results indicate that observing the motif information during clustering leads to final clusters that enhance the performance of downstream phenotype prediction models (Figures {@fig:preds}A and {@fig:predsS}).


<!-- Model behavior -->
Next, we explored how using different weights affects the overall phosphorylation signal and sequence information of the resulting clusters. To do so, we compared the model behavior after clustering the CPTAC data with a weight of 0 (peptide abundance only), 20 (mix), and 50 (mainly sequence). First, we hypothesized that the abundance-only model would generate clusters wherein its members would show less variation in phosphorylation signal and thus a lower mean squared error (MSE). To test this, we computed the average peptide-to-cluster MSE of 2000 randomly selected peptides for each model across all clusters. Although the differences were not significant, we did observe a direct correlation between weight and MSE (Figure {@fig:preds}B). Next, we calculated the cumulative PSSM enrichment by summing the sequence information (bits) of all cluster PSSMs per model. As expected, increasing the weight led to a corresponding increase in the cumulative sequence information (Figure {@fig:preds}C). To further illustrate the clustering behavior, we tracked the phosphosite TBC1D5 S584-p in the three models. Consistent with the general trend, the abundance-only and mixed models generated lower p-signal MSE when compared to its cluster center than the Sequence model whereas weight correlated with the total PSSM enrichment (Figures {@fig:preds}D-E). Next, we quantified whether in addition to an increase in absolute enrichment, the mixed and sequence-only models generated more similar cluster motifs to TBC1D5 S584-p sequence than the abundance-only model. To do so, we computed the mean of all pairwise PAM250 scores between the query sequence and all cluster sequences across models which clearly confirmed that as the sequence prioritization of the model increases, the cluster PSSM is not only more enriched across all positions but also displays a more representative sequence of TBC1D5 phosphosite (Figures {@fig:preds}F-I). These results show that using a mixed weight that similarly prioritizes both information sources—peptide abundance and sequence—leads to more robust clustering of phosphosites through a tradeoff between phosphorylation abundance and sequence motifs.

### Widespread, dramatic signaling differences between tumor and normal adjascent tissue

![**Conserved tumor differences compared to normal adjacent tissue** A) Hierarchical clustering of DDMC cluster centers. B–C) Principal components analysis scores (B) and loadings (C) of the samples and phosphopeptide clusters, respectively. D) Phosphorylation signal of tumor and NAT samples per cluster and statistical significance according to a Mann Whitney rank test (* = p-value < 0.05 and ** = p-value < 0.001). E) Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) of a regularized logistic regression model. F) Logistic regression weights per cluster. G) Upstream kinase predictions of clusters 11 and 12. (H) NetPhorest kinase predictions of cluster 12. (I-J) Gene ontology analysis and (K-L) representative peptides of enriched biological processes of clusters 11 and 12.](figureM5.svg "Figure 5"){#fig:TvsNAT width="100%"}

<!-- The signaling in both tissues is so different that any modeling strategy captures distinct patterns -->
We explored whether DDMC could recognize conserved signaling patterns in tumors compared to normal adjacent tissue (NAT). The signaling difference between tumors and NAT samples was substantial, highlighting the significant signaling rewiring that tumor cells must undergo (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}A). Using principal components analysis, we could observe that NAT samples were more similar to one another than to each tumor sample (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}B/C). Nearly every cluster was significantly different in its average abundance between tumor and NAT (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}D). Not surprisingly given these enormous differences, samples could be almost perfectly classified using their phosphopeptide signatures, with or without DDMC (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}E; {@fig:TvsNATS}). Using the DDMC clusters, a logistic regression model identified that NAT versus tumor status could be predicted with cluster 11 alone (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}C).

<!-- NEK1/2 and ciliagenesis -->
With the abundance changes and regression results we observed, we decided to further explore clusters 11 and 12. Cluster 11 shows a PSSM motif that might correspond to NEK1, 2, and 4, and an enrichment of peptides involved in gas and oxygen transport, as well as cytoskleleton remodeling or migration-related phenotypes according to a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (Figures {@fig:TvsNAT}G and I). Even though NEKs are a largely understudied family of serine/threonine kinases, NEK1/2 have an established role in the formation and disassembly of cilia and NEK4 has also been implicated in regulating microtubule dynamics and stability [@PMID:22040655; @PMID:24921005]. The primary cilium serves as a signaling hub via the local expression of cell surface receptors and signaling molecules to sense environmental stimuli and thus promote a handful of phenotypes including adaptation to hypoxia, migration, and escape from apoptosis [@PMID:30884815; @PMID:18381407]. Cancer cells typically lack cilia which could promote the emergence of these malignant phenotypes. Cluster 11 displays a striking phosphorylation decrease in tumor samples compared with NATs which could be representative of the presence or lack of NEK1/2 signaling, respectively. Within this group of peptides, there is a notable overrepresentation of hemoglobin subunits (HBG1, HBD, HBB, and HBA2) which could illustrate the different oxygenation status of NATs versus malignant tissues. Moreover, several cytoskeletal-remodeling proteins are present in cluster 11 such as PEAK1, FLNA, GAS2L2, MARCKS, PEAK1, and ARHGEF7. The abundance of all these signaling molecules is substantially decreased in tumor compared to NAT samples (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}K).

<!-- CK2 and DNA damage response -->
On the other hand, cluster 12 was clearly identified as a substrate motif favored by CK2 (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}G). This association was also established by NetPhorest which identified 146 CK2 substrates in this cluster such as AP3D1 S632-p, ATAD2 S1139-p, ATRX S1352-p, BAZ1B S708-p, CHD4 S103-p, DEK S227-p, IWS1 S400-p, MTER1 S166-p, MCM3 S672-p, LEO1 S279-p, HDAC2 S422-p, INF2 T1179-p, and EAPP S109-p (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}H). GO analysis of cluster 12 identified a substantial enrichment of negative regulators of DNA duplex unwinding and pre-replicative complex assembly involved in cell cycle DNA replication (Figures {@fig:TvsNAT}G, I-J). DNA duplex unwinding and replication are important processes that play a major role in maintaining genome stability. DNA helicases are the enzymes responsible for unwinding the DNA and thus are essential for DNA replication. As such, they have been widely associated with DNA damage response (DDR) and cancer development [@PMID:23842644]. CK2 has been widely implicated in modulating DNA repair signaling pathways in response to DNA damage to promote cell survival in cancer [@PMID:25852190; @PMID:20164059; @PMID:27306791]. In fact, a study found that the CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 blocked DDR induced by gemcitabine and cisplatin and synergizes with these compounds in ovarian cancer cell lines [@PMID:22267551]. Cluster 12 contains several signaling proteins related to DNA replication and genome stability such as MCM3/4, the p53 interactor TP53BP1, BRCA1, ATRX, CENPF, and CDKs whose signal is strikingly decreased in NATs and increased in tumor samples (Figure {@fig:TvsNAT}L). These results, therefore, suggest that CK2 might activate signaling molecules within cluster 12 involved in DNA repair pathways to induce the survival of cancer cells. Taken together, DDMC builds phosphoproteomic clusters that present signaling dysregulation common to tumors compared to NATs and identifies putative upstream kinases modulating them. These features can help to interpret phosphoproteomic results and inform the generation of hypotheses for follow up experiments.

### Genetic driver mutations are associated with more targeted phosphoproteomic rewiring

![** Phosphoproteomic aberrations associated with STK11 mutational status** A) Phosphorylation signal of STK11 WT and mutant samples per cluster and statistical significance according to a Mann-Whitney rank test (* = p-value < 0.05 and ** = p-value < 0.001). B) ROC of a logistic regression model predicting the STK11 mutational status and (C) its corresponding weights per sample type. (D) Putative upstream kinases of clusters 7, and 8. (E) Representative cohesin loading peptides in cluster 7. (F-G) GO analysis and representative Golgi fragmentation peptides of cluster 8.](figureM6.svg "Figure 6"){#fig:STK11 width="100%"}

<!-- STK11 DDMC data  -->
Inactivating somatic mutations in STK11 lead to increased tumorigenesis and metastasis [@PMID:17676035]. Thus, we aimed to identify the phosphoproteomic aberrations triggered by this genetic event. The majority of clusters were significantly altered, generally toward higher abundances with a mutation (Figure {@fig:STK11}A). The cluster centers corresponding to each patient’s tumor and NAT samples could successfully predict the STK11 mutational status by regularized logistic regression (Figure {@fig:STK11}B). The tumor phosphoproteomic signal of cluster 7 greatly contributed to classify mutant STK11 samples, whereas the tumor signal of 8 and 14 helped classify WT STK11 specimens (Figure {@fig:STK11}C). These results motivated further exploration of clusters 7 and 8 which present sequence motifs favored by ERK2, and CK1/BRCA1/PKD, respectively (Figure {@fig:STK11}D).

<!-- ERK2 cohesin loading -->
Cluster 7 is highly enriched with peptides involved in regulation of the cell cycle by cohesin loading (Figure {@fig:STK11}E). Cohesin is a protein complex that mediates sister chromatid cohesion by directly binding with DNA. This interaction holds both chromatids together after DNA replication until anaphase wherein cohesin is removed to facilitate chromosome segregation during cell division. Cluster 7 contains the inhibitor phosphosite of the tumor suppressor RB1 S795-p, the member of the cohesin loading complex NIPBL (S280-p, S280-p;S284-p, and S350-p), and the cohesin release factor WAPL (S221-p and S221-p;S223-p). Studies have shown that RB1 inactivation can lead to defects in chromosome cohesion that in turn compromises chromosome stability [@PMID:20551165; @PMID:24613344]. Manning et al demonstrated that depletion of WAPL in RB1-deficient cells promoted cohesin association with chromatin [@PMID:24613344]. Among these phosphosites, we observed strong opposing signals between STK11 WT and mutant patients in NIPBL S280-p; WAPL S221-p, S223-p; and RB1 S795-p (Figure {@fig:STK11}E) which reinforces the association between STK11 activity and chromatin instability. Moreover, CDCA5 is key regulator of sister chromatid cohesion by stabilizing cohesin complex association with chromatin and was identified as a prognostic factor of lung cancer through a tumor tissue microarray analysis of 262 non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients [@PMID:20551060]. They showed that CDCA5 phosphorylation of S209 by ERK2 enhanced cell proliferation [@PMID:20551060]. Therefore, these results might suggest that mutations inactivating mutations in STK11 might correlate with signaling defects in sister chromatid cohesion during the cell cycle which in turn lead to chromosome instability and cell cancer growth. In fact, STK11 inactivation has been associated with genomic instability, although the signaling mechanism underlying this phenotypic response remains elusive [@PMID:20919528, @PMID:21532627].

<!-- CK1 and Golgi coating -->
The signal of phosphosites in cluster 8, specifically in tumor samples, largely contributes to predict the signaling differences between STK11 WT and mutant samples (Figure {@fig:STK11}C). This cluster presents a clear enrichment of peptides involved in the regulation of the Golgi apparatus such as GOLGA2-5, GOLGB1, and GOLPH3 (Figure {@fig:STK11}F). Cancer cells commonly undergo fragmentation of the Golgi which has been shown to drive several malignant molecular signatures including the hyperactivity of motor proteins and kinase signaling dysregulation [@PMID:27064441]. Myosin 18A and 1E pertain to cluster 18 and the former has been reported to interact with GOLPH3 to induce Golgi dispersal. Moreover, a series of studies uncovered that GOLPH3 promotes cell proliferation in cancer [@PMID:23006319; @PMID:22675169; @PMID:23132295]. The phosphorylation behavior of GOLPH3, Myosin 18A, and GOLGA2 in STK11 WT compared with STK11 mutant patients shows a dramatic increase of abundance in the latter which supports the association between STK11 activity and an oncogenic role of the Golgi apparatus in these patients (Figure {@fig:STK11}E). Together, these results suggest that STK11 mutations in tumor samples could affect the dispersion of the Golgi apparatus compared with STK11 WT samples.

<!-- EGFRm/ALKf -->
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) targeting the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) EGFR and ALK are effective treatments in cancer patients with EGFR mutations and/or ALK translocations (EGFRm/ALKf). However, these treatments are limited by drug resistance which in some cases can be mediated by the concomitant signaling of both RTKs activated by driver mutations [@PMID:21791641; @PMID:27707887]. Once again, the signaling cluster centers allowed a regularized logistic regression model to more accurately classify samples according to its EGFRm/ALKf status (Figure {@fig:EGFRm/ALKf}).

<!-- Comparison to other regression strategies -->
Finally, we compared the classification performance of four regularized logistic regression models fit to either the DDMC clusters, clusters generated by the standard methods GMM and k-means, or the raw phosphoproteomic data directly. It is worth noting that unlike DDMC, methods such as GMM, k-means, or direct regression cannot handle missing values and thus for these strategies we used the 1,311 peptides that were observed in all samples, whereas DDMC was fit to the entire data set comprising 30,561 phosphosites. We found that samples were classified with higher accuracy using DDMC compared to a GMM and with similar performance to k-means, especially with STK11 (Figure {@fig:RegressionsS}A). Direct regression to the raw signaling data yielded excellent performance; however, this strategy assigns thousands of coefficients to different peptides that vary every time the model is run, rendering this approach unable to establish a consistent link between mutations and signaling (Figure {@fig:RegressionsS}). In contrast, our analysis identifies a consistent association between STK11 activity with two novel phenotypes, namely chromosome cohesion during cell cycle and Golgi fragmentation, and proposes putative signaling mechanisms to support it.

### Exploration of immune infiltration-associated signaling patterns in tumors   

![**Phosphoproteomic signatures correlating with tumor immune infiltration** (A) Phosphorylation abundance of CTE and HTE samples per cluster and statistical significance according to a Mann-Whitney rank test (* = p-value < 0.05 and ** = p-value < 0.001). (B–C) ROC and coefficients of a logistic regression model predicting infiltration status—cold-tumor enriched (CTE) versus hot-tumor enriched (HTE). (D) Putative upstream kinases of clusters 7, 17, 20, and 21. (E–G) GO enrichment analysis of select clusters. (H–J) Selected peptides driving the GO biological processes in HTE versus CTE samples.](figureM7.svg "Figure 7"){#fig:TI width="100%"}

<!-- Intro to immunotherapy in NSCLC -->
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have emerged as effective treatment options for NSCLC patients. However, there still is a need to identify or influence which patients will respond to these therapies. Patients that do not respond to ICIs often have tumors with poor immune infiltration either inherently or via an adaptive process after long exposure to the drug. However, the signaling mechanism by which malignant cells prevent tumor infiltration remains elusive. We used our DDMC clusters to explore the shared signaling patterns that differentiate “hot-tumor-enriched” (HTE) from “cold-tumor-enriched” CTE LUAD patients [@PMID:32649874; @PMID:29141660]. HTE and CTE status per patient was determined using xCell by Gilette et al [@PMID:32649874].

<!-- Data -->
We observed that four clusters were significantly different in their average abundance between HTE and CTE samples (Figure {@fig:TI}A). Cluster 17, 18, and 20 display significantly higher abundances in HTE compared to CTE samples whereas cluster 21 presents the opposite trend. Samples could be accurately classified using the DDMC clusters (Figure {@fig:TI}B). This predictive performance was mainly explained by a positive association of cluster 2 with HTE status and cluster 6 with CTE. Other clusters contributed to explain the signaling differences between both groups but to a lesser extent (Figure {@fig:TI}C).

<!-- Interpretation -->
These results prompted us to further investigate clusters 6, 17, 20, and 21 which our model predicts to be regulated by CK1/PKA, STK11/p38, CK2/STK11, and ERK2, respectively (Figure {@fig:TI}D). When exploring immunologically relevant phenotypes in the GO analysis of each cluster, we observed that clusters 6, 17, and 20 showed a substantial over-representation of immunological processes. Conversely, neither of these were present in the GO analyses of cluster 2 nor cluster 21 wherein the former substantially contributes to predict CTE samples and the latter shows a significant increase of phosphorylation abundance in CTE over HTE samples (Figures {@fig:TI}A and C). A gene ontology analysis indicates that cluster 6 members are particularly involved in mediating B cell homeostasis, but also T cell differentiation, T cell receptor signaling, and regulation of T cell activation. These processes are promoted, at least in part, by ABL1, LCK, PAK1, and DOCK10/11 which show an increased abundance in HTE and are attenuated in CTE samples (Figures {@fig:TI}E and H). Cluster 17 GO analysis unveiled an over-representation of several innate and adaptive immune response pathways possibly involving CD44, SDK1, PKC, PLD1, CAPN1 and GSTP1. For instance, CD44 is expressed in both endothelial and immune cells and its regulation plays a key role in enabling neutrophil and lymphocyte recruitment into tissues [@PMID:15585887; @PMID:30395540] (Figures {@fig:TI}F and I). A study found that the osteopontin (OPN)/CD44 interaction is an immune checkpoint that controls CD8+ T cell activation and tumor immune evasion in which elevated expression of OPN correlated with decreased patient survival and conferred host tumor immune tolerance. Cluster 20 is enriched in responses orchestrated by the innate immune system (Figures {@fig:TI}G and J). The transcription factor NFATC crucially promotes T cell activation and proliferation, and several studies show that the predicted upstream kinase of cluster 20 CK2 directly phosphorylates this protein and enhances its gene expression [@PMID:10652349; @PMID:31988467]. In addition, CK2 has also been shown to phosphorylate Regulators of Calcineurin (RCAN) proteins, which indirectly inhibit NFATC function [@PMID:23732701]. Several RCAN and NFATC peptides are present in cluster 20, however S210-p and S366-p, respectively show the largest abundance difference between HTE and CTE. Unexpectedly, RCAN1 S210-p shows a higher signal in HTE than in CTE whereas NFATC3 S366-p presents the opposite trend which might indicate that both phosphorylation events are inhibitory. Together, these results reinforce the role of CK2 in promoting immune infiltration in lung cancer patients. Intriguingly, inactivating mutations in STK11 have been reported to promote anti-PD1/PD-L1 resistance in KRAS-mutant LUAD suggesting a key role of STK11 in promoting tumor immune infiltration [@PMID:29773717]. Overall, these data demonstrate that the presence or lack of tumor immune infiltration can be accurately predicted by the DDMC clusters which in turn help identify putative upstream kinases modulating immune evasion.
