## Materials and Methods

All analysis was implemented in Python v3.9 and can be found at <https://github.com/meyer-lab/resistance-MS>.

### Expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm architecture

We constructed a modified mixture model that clusters peptides based on both their abundance across conditions and their peptide sequence. The model is constructed using a given number of clusters and weighting factor to prioritize either the data or the sequence information. Fitting was performed using expectation-maximization, initialized at a starting point. The starting point was derived from k-means clustering the abundance data after missing values were imputed by PCA with a component number equal to the number of clusters. During the expectation (E) step, the algorithm calculates the probability of each peptide being assigned to each cluster. In the maximization (M) step, each cluster’s distributions are fit using the weighted cluster assignments. The peptide sequence and abundance assignments within the E step are combined by taking the sum of the log-likelihood of both assignments. The peptide log-likelihood is multiplied by a user-defined scaling factor immediately before to influence its importance. Both steps repeat until convergence as defined by the increase in model log-likelihood between iterations falling below a user-defined threshold.

### Phosphorylation site abundance clustering in the presence of missing values

We modeled the log-transformed abundance of each phosphopeptide as following a multivariate Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance. Each dimension of this distribution represents the abundance of that peptide within a given sample. For example, within a data set of 100 patients and 1000 peptides, using 10 clusters, the data is represented by 10 Gaussian distributions of 100 dimensions. Unobserved/missing values were indicated as NaN and ignored during both distribution estimation and when calculating probabilities. Any peptides that were detected in only one TMT experiment were discarded.

### Sequence-cluster comparison

#### PAM250

During model initialization, the pairwise distance between all peptides in the dataset was calculated using the PAM250 matrix. The mean distance from each peptide to a given cluster could then be calculated by:

$$w=\frac{1}{n} \left(P \cdot v \right)$$

Where $P$ is the $n \times n$ distance matrix, $n$ is the number of peptides in the dataset, $v$ is the probability of each peptide being assigned to the cluster of interest, and $w$ is the log-probabilities of cluster assignment after re-assignment.

#### Binomial enrichment

We alternatively used a binomial enrichment model for the sequence representation of a cluster. Upon model initialization, a background matrix $G$ was created with a position-specific scoring matrix of all the sequences together. Next, an $i \times j \times k$ data tensor $T$ was created where $i$ is the number of peptides, $j$ is the number of amino acid possibilities, and $k$ is the position relative to the phosphorylation site. This tensor contained 1 where an amino acid was present for that position and peptide, and 0 elsewhere.

Within each iteration, the cluster motif would be updated using $v$, the probability of each peptide being assigned to the cluster of interest. First, a weighted count for each amino acid and position would be assembled:

$$k = \left(T^\intercal \cdot v \right)^\intercal$$

Because peptides can be partially assigned to a cluster, the counts of each amino acid and position can take continuous values. We therefore generalized the binomial distribution to allow continuous values using the regularized incomplete Beta function:

$$M = B \left(\| \vec{v}\|_1 - k, k + 1, 1 - G \right)$$

Finally, the log-probabiltiy of membership for each peptide was calculated based on the product of each amino acid-position probability.

$$w = \log (T \times M)$$

We confirmed that this provided identical results to a binomial enrichment model for integer counts of amino acids [@16273072], but allowed for partial assignment of peptides to clusters.

### Quantifying the influence of sequence versus data

The magnitude of the weight used to scale the sequence and data scores is arbitrary. We do know that with a weight of 0 the model only uses the phosphorylation measurements. Alternatively, with an enormously large weight the motif information is prioritized. However, we do not know to what extent each information source is prioritized in general. Therefore, to quantify the relative importance of each type of data, we calculated our clustering results at each weighting extreme, and then calculated the Frobenius norm of the resulting peptide assignments between those and the clustering of interest.

### Generating Cluster Motifs and Upstream Kinase Predictions

For each cluster we computed a position-specific-scoring matrix (PSSM). To do so, we populated a residue/position matrix with the sum of the corresponding cluster probabilities for every peptide. Thus, for a particular peptide the same probability will be summed to the corresponding residue/position pairs of the resulting matrix. Once all peptides have been observed, the resulting matrix is normalized by averaging the mean probability across amino acids and log2-transformed to generate a PSSM. In parallel, we computed a PSSM including all sequences that served as background to account for the different amino acid occurrences within the data set. Then, we subtracted each cluster PSSM with the background PSSM and limited any large negative numbers to -3. Next, we extracted several kinase specificity profiling results from the literature [@PMID26551075; @PMID18765831; @PMID26551075; @PMID31124786]. The distance between PSSM and PSSL motifs was calculated using by the Frobenius norm of the difference. Motif logo plots were generated using logomaker [@DOI:10.1101/635029].

### Evaluate clustering by imputation of values

To evaluate the ability of our model to bypass the challenge of handling incomplete data sets, we removed random, individual TMT experiments for each peptide and used the model to impute these values. The number of missing values per peptide is highly variable. Therefore, in our error quantitation, we stratified peptides by their missingness percentage and computed the average mean squared error between the actual values and predictions—or imputed peptide average—in each group. We calculated the reconstruction error across different combinations of cluster numbers and weights using the same process.

### Associating clusters with molecular and clinical features

To find clusters that tracked with specific molecular or clinical features we implemented two different strategies: logistic regression and hypothesis testing. For binary problems such as Tumor vs NAT samples or mutational status we used l1 regularized logistic regression and Mann-Whitney rank tests. In the former, we tried to predict the feature of interest using the phosphorylation signal of the cluster centers, whereas in the latter, for each cluster we split all patients according to their specific feature and tested whether the difference in the median signal between both groups was statistically different. We performed Bonferroni correction on the p-values computed by the Mann-Whitney tests.
