## Results

### The ability of AXL to confer erlotinib resistance varies among PC9 AXL mutants

![**Phenotypic consequences of AXL YF mutations.** Cells were either untreated, treated with erlotinib for 4h, or treated with erlotinib for 4h and subsequently with AF154 for 10min. Cell viability, death, and migration via a scratch wound assay were monitored over time using Incucyte. (A-E) Fold-change cell viability of PC9 AXL mutant cells untreated or treated with erlotinib and AF154 compared to erlotinib only after (A) or over (B-E) 96h. (F-J) Fold-change YOYO+ cells untreated or treated with erlotinib AF154 compared to erlotinib only after (A) or over (G-J) 72h. (K-O) Fold-change relative wound density (RWD) percentage of AXL mutants compared to erlotinib only after (K) or over (L-O) 14h. Note that in (A-F) cells were normalized to initial time point 24h and to erlotinib whereas in(G-J and L-O) to 24h and 0h, respectively. (P-R) "Island effect" was quantified by modeling the cell-to-cell distance using Ripley's K function. (P) Fold-change K estimate to erlotinib. (Q-R) K estimate of WT-like Y698F and KO-like Y634F across different radiis. (S-T) PCA analysis of the PC9 AXL mutant phenotypes across conditions. ](figure1.svg "Figure 1"){#fig:pheno width="100%"}

### Overview of the phosphoproteomic state of PC9 AXL mutants 

![**Signaling characterization of PC9 AXL mutants.** (A-B) Hierarchical clustering and PCA analysis (B) of phosphoproteomic status of AXL mutants treated with erlotinib for 4h and subsequently with AF154 for 10min. (C-E) Phosphorylation behavior of AXL, EGFR, and ERK1/2 phosphosites across cell lines. (F-G) KSEA analysis (F) and volcano plot (G) comparing signaling of PC9 WT with PC9 AXL KO. ](figure2.svg "Figure 2"){#fig:phospho width="100%"}

### Our model predicts several upstream components of the YAP patwhay as drivers of AXL-mediated malignant phenotypes

![**Prediction of kinases driving AXL-mediated malignant phenotypes.** A) Modeling strategy—Signaling data is preprocessed by filtering peptides out by variance among cell lines and by variability of MS biological replicates. Additionally, all peptide sequences are uniformly modified to show ±5 residues surrounding the phosphoacceptor amino acid. Then, the resulting data set is clustered by phosphorylation signal and peptide sequence using DDMC [CITE]. DDMC cluster centers are used to fit a PLSR model. (B-C) PLSR model scores and loadings (F-H) Cluster centers. "n" indicates the number of peptides per cluster. (I-M) Logo plots illustrating cluster PSSMs. (N) Heatmap showing the frobenius distance between cluster PSSMs and PSPL matrices of putative upstream kinases modulating clusters. ](figure3.svg "Figure 3"){#fig:clusters width="100%"}


### AXL activates YAP to promote cell growth in the presence of erlotinib

![**YAP promotes cell growth in an AXL-dependent manner.** (A-H) Cell viability time course of PC9 WT (A-D) and AXL KO cells (E-H) in the presence of erlotinib, erlotinib and R428, and erlotinib and AF154 in addition to a varying concentration of dasatinib. (I) Dasatinib dose response inhibition of YAP. (J) AXL-mediated activation of YAP. ](figure4.svg "Figure 4"){#fig:yap width="100%"}