## Methods

| AXL Genotype         | Known Intracellular interactors | ScanSite | NetworKIN | NetPhorest | PDB | Known Phenotype|
| -------------------- | ------------------------------- | -------- | --------- | ---------- | --- | -------------- |
| Wild-type            | PI3K, AKT, GRB2, p85, PLCγ, SRC, LCK | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | Cell survival, proliferation, migration,<br> and immunosuppression |
| Knock-Out            | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | Inverse phenotyes of WT |
| Transduced Wild-type | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A |
| K567R                | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | Kinase dead, typically recapitulates KO phenotypes |
| Y634F                | - | SHC | - | CRKL, SRC, PTP R3 | - | - |
| Y643F                | - | p85 | - | - | - | - |
| Y698F                | - | - | INPPL1, BCAR3 | FLT3, CSF1R, KIT, PDGFR, PTP R3 | - | - |
| Y726F                | - | - | CBL, SYK | PTP R3 | - | - |
| Y750F                | - | - | - | SH2D | - | - |
| Y821F                | PI3K, AKT, GRB2, p85, PLCγ, SRC, LCK | p85, FGR, GRB2 | GRB2, PI3K, GRAP, MIST SHP2 | PIK3R, GRB2, SRC, PTP R3 | - | - |

#### Search Parameters:
Scansite: Stringency = "High" for Y821, and "medium" for the rest.
NetworKIN: Minimum score = 1.11 for Y812 ; 0.89 for the rest.
NetPhorest: Minimum score = 0.20 for Y634, Y643, and Y821 ; = 0.10 for Y726 and Y750


### Reagents and Cell Culture

Erlotinib was obtained from LC Laboratories. The AXL activating antibody AF154 was obtained from R&D Systems. PC9 (Sigma Aldrich) cells were grown in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin. HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 

### Generation of Mutant Cell Lines

The PC9 AXL KO cell line was generated by transfecting cells with a CRISPR/Cas9 and GFP vector containing a gRNA targeting the AXL kinase domain. gRNA sequence, as well as cell culturing and sorting methods, have been previously described [@pmid:28923840]. Plasmids containing the AXL phosphosite mutations were generated from an AXL-IRES-Puro vector (Addgene #65627) using a site directed mutagenesis kit (New England Biosciences).

Each mutant was copied from its respective plasmid, digested, and inserted into a lentiviral vector containing a puromycin resistance gene (Addgene #17448). For viral packaging, HEK 293T cells were seeded 4.5 x 10^6^ per 10 cm dish. After 24 hours, the lentiviral AXL expression vector, VSV-G envelope vector, and packaging vector (Addgene #12259 and #12260 respectively) were combined in a 10:1:10 mass ratio and diluted in Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TransIT-LT1 (Mirus Bio) was added dropwise and the solution was mixed gently by swirling and incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes. The solution was then added dropwise to the cells. After 18 hours, transfection media was replaced by media supplemented with 1% BSA fraction V (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were incubated for 24 hours, after which the virus-containing media was removed and stored at 4℃. The media was replaced and the cells incubated a further 24 hours to generate a second batch of viral media. The harvested batches were then pooled, filtered through a .45μm PVDF membrane to remove packaging cells, and flash frozen followed by storage at -80ºC until use.

PC9 AXL KO cells were seeded with antibiotic-free media in a 6-well plate at a density of 1.5 x 105 cells per well and incubated for 24 hours. Cells were then infected with viral particles in antibiotic-free media supplemented with polybrene (MilliporeSigma). After 18 hours, the media was replaced with fresh antibiotic-free media. Cells were observed for a GFP positive population and passaged into a 10cm plate until confluent. The virally transduced cell lines were then sorted for GFP expressing cells using a BD FACSAria cell sorter. The mutant cell populations were then subcultured for later experiments.

### Preparation of Cell Lysates

Cell lines were grown to confluence in 10 cm dishes over the course of 72-96 hours, washed, and treated by addition of media containing 1 μM erlotinib. Cells were incubated for 4 hours at 37ºC and then additionally treated with media containing 1 μM erlotinib and 300 ng/mL AXL activating antibody for 10 minutes. The cells were then placed immediately on ice, washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline, and lysed with cold 8 M urea containing Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail I and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail I (Boston BioProducts). The lysates were then centrifuged at 20,000xg, 4℃ to pellet cell debris, and the supernatants removed and stored at -80℃.

### Cell Viability Assay

Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at a density of 1.05 x 10^3^ cells per well. After 24 hours, treatments were added in media containing 300nm YOYO-3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were cultured and imaged every 3 hours using an IncuCyte S3 (Essen Bioscience) at 20x magnification with 9 images per well. The phase, green, and red channels were manually thresholded and then analyzed by IncuCyte S3 software (Essen Bioscience) to determine cell counts and fraction of area covered.

### Cell Migration Assay

96-well IncuCyte ImageLock plates (Essen Bioscience) were coated with a Collagen-I solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed twice, and then seeded with 4 x 10^4^ cells per well. After a 4 hour incubation, cells were wounded using the IncuCyte WoundMaker, washed twice to remove detached cells, and then treated with respective conditions. Images of the center of the wound were taken every 2 hours at a magnification of 10x, one image per well. The phase and green channels were thresholded and analyzed as above to determine migration measurements.

All analysis was implemented in Python, and can be found at <https://github.com/meyer-lab/resistance-MS>.
